The Torch of Wisdom
A Method of Offering Butter Lamps Based on Ārya Mañjuśrī
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo mañjuśriye!
With the wisdom light of twofold knowledgeYou dispel the dark of beings’ ignorance,Mañjuvajra,
I devotedly bow down before you,And now set out this brief means of offering lamps.
On occasions such as the major festivals commemorating episodes in the life of the Victorious
One, should you wish to employ a method related to the mantra tradition for offering radiant
butter lamps to the precious and noble great Treasury of Wisdom, then begin by practising
a yoga of Mañjuśrī, whether brief or elaborate, and then sprinkle purifying water on
the garland of lamps and dispel obstacles with amrita kundali. Then continue with:
om ah hung
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ.
tongsum ying kyi kongbu ru
In the vessel of the spacious trichiliocosm,
si sum yeshe marmé bar
I ignite the three worlds as the lamp of wisdom.
rik druk khorwé münsel shying
May this dispel saṃsāra’s dark among the six classes
ösal nangwa gyepar gyur
And cause the experience of luminosity to increase.
om maha jnana aloké benza saparana kham
oṃ mahā jñāna aloke vajra spharaṇa khaṃ
hung, nöchü jikten rabjam kyi
Hūṃ. All apparent things within infinite worlds,
nangwé ngöpo tamché kün
Including both environment and inhabitants,
ngowo ösal gökarmo
Are in essence luminous Paṇḍaravāsinī1
nampa nangsal rinchen treng
And in form jewel garlands of clear illumination.
ö kyi jedrak tayepé
This limitless variety of sources of luminosity
khordé kün gyi münpa sel
Dispels the darkness of all saṃsāra and nirvāṇa.
yeshe nangwa lammewa
The light of wisdom, forever shining brightly,
drowé marmé yeshe drön
The lamp of beings, the torch of wisdom,
ziji chenpo chöpé trin
Offering clouds of great resplendence,
döyön gyatsö ter chenpö
A great treasury of oceanic sensory delights,
jampal dorjé kyilkhor lha
I present to the deities of Mañjuśrīvajra’s maṇḍala,
rabjam gyutrul drawé tsok
The assembly of the infinite Illusory Web,
khor dang chepé chen lam du
Together with their retinues.
bulwé dakchak khor ché kyi
Through this, as I and those around me
ché dang rangshyin diktung shak
Confess our natural and proscribed misdeeds and downfalls,
damtsik nyamchak shyiwa dang
Please heal all our impairments and breakages of samaya,
mitün galkyen barché sol
And dispel all disadvantage, adversity, and obstacles.
tsé sö paljor pel shying gyé
Expand and increase our longevity, merit, glory and wealth.
chaktok drib sum pangpa yi
By eliminating the three kinds of restraining obstruction,
khyen nyi yeshe gyepa dang
Expand the wisdom of twofold knowledge
drowé timuk münpa sel
And dispel the darkness of delusion among beings.
jampal dorjé sang sum dang
Cause us to realize perfect buddhahood,
yermé ngönpar changchub dzö
Inseparable from Mañjuśrīvajra’s three secrets.
om ah hung arya manydzu shri jnana aloké sarva pudza samaya ho
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ārya mañjuśrī jñāna āloke sarva pūja samaya hoḥ
Make a hundred or however many offerings. At intervals recite:
dakchak khor dang chepé dikdrib nyetung tamché shanting kuru soha
Purify all misdeeds, obscurations, faults and downfalls for us and those around us—śāntiṃ kuru
svāhā!
khyen nyi yeshe kyi nangwa tamché pushting kuru om
Increase the wisdom vision of twofold knowledge—puṣṭiṃ kuru oṃ!
With this you can add requests. When completing the total, as the fulfilment through the lamp
offering, recite:
om ara pa tsana dhih
oṃ a ra pa ca na dhīḥ
Chant this seven or twenty-one times.
Recite the fulfilment of the lamp offering from Narak Dongtruk, which begins, “Be fulfilled!
Through this lamp, let your wishes be fulfilled!”2 together with the mantra of sevenfold
cleansing.3 Conclude with:
jampal dorjé kyilkhor gyi lhatsok tamché chok tu gyé
The deities of Mañjuśrīvajra’s maṇḍala are supremely delighted.
tukka né yeshe kyi özer sam gyi mi khyabpa jung
Inconceivable rays of wisdom light emerge from their hearts,
marmé la tim dé lé özer khakhyab tu trö
Dissolve into the lamps, which send out further rays to fill the whole of space,
dak dang semchen tamché kyi tok drib nyamchak gyu dang chepa jang
Purifying my own and all other beings’ conceptual obscurations, impairments and breakages, together
with their causes.
sangwa sum gyi jinlab dang ngödrub tamché tob
We receive the blessings of the three secrets and all forms of attainment.
pobpé terchen gyé tob ching
We obtain the eight treasures of courageous eloquence,
ösal gyi gongpa khakhyab tu sharwar gyur
And our realization of clear light dawns to pervade the whole of space.
om benza jnana dipé siddhi siddhi hung a a ah
oṃ vajra jñāna dīpe siddhi siddhi hūṃ | a a aḥ
Sustain the mind of realization.
Finally recite the aspiration of the lamp. For this you can use the lamp aspiration which the
omniscient guru Jampal Gyepa extracted from the sūtras and also the following uncommon aspiration
of the lamp:
ho, dal khyab tiklé chenpö kyilkhor du
Hoḥ. In the maṇḍala of the great all-pervasive sphere,
rangshyin ösal dorjé lobpön dang
May the vajra master of natural luminosity
riktsal lugu gyü kyi checham nam
And the brothers and sisters of the chains of expressive awareness
changchub nyingpö bardu mindral shok
Never part until the essence of awakening!

ngejung chenpö khorwé trulpa tong
With great renunciation, may we see saṃsāra’s deception.
nyingjé chenpö dro kün pamar tok
With great compassion, may we realize how all beings are our parents.
mögü chenpö lamé jinlab shyuk
With great devotion, may we receive the guru’s blessings.
naljor chenpö damtsik tarchin shok
May we perfect the samayas of a great practitioner.

tawa jarmé neluk ngön du gyur
May we realize the view of the natural state beyond action,
gompa lodé ösal lhum su shyuk
May we enter the womb of luminous meditation beyond the mind,
chöpa rangdrol khyabdal nyukmé ngang
May we sustain the conduct of natural freedom, pervasive and genuine,
pang tob dralwé drebu ro chik shok
And experience the single taste of fruition beyond discardment or attainment.

rikdang chönyi ngönsum lhukpar tong
May I see the dharmatā radiance of awareness directly and relaxedly,
riktsal nyam kyi nangwa gong du pel
May the visionary experience that are expressions of awareness increase,
rigpa tsepeb ku dang yeshe dzok
May awareness reach full measure with the perfection of the kāyas and wisdoms,
riktong chöku chenpo ngöngyur shok
And may I actualize the great dharmakāya of awareness and emptiness.

galté tsé dir tenpa ma tob na
If I should fail to attain stability in this lifetime,
chipö tokpa chökü ying su tim
May my thoughts at death’s departure dissolve into the basic space of dharmakāya,
chönyi rang dang longchö dzok kur drol
May the self-radiance of dharmatā be liberated into sambhogakāya forms,
sipé trulnang tulkur lhün dzok shok
And may the deluded experiences of becoming be spontaneously perfected as nirmāṇakāya.

shyi ying khyechö drukden ngöngyur né
Having realized the space of the ground with its six special features,
shyi nang zuk kyi namrol talepé
May each and every being of the three realms,
kham sum dro kün chik kyang malüpa
In the infinite display of form that manifests out of the ground,
rangshyin dömé ying su drolwar shok
Be freed within natural and primordial basic space.

Offer this prayer of aspiration from the depths of your heart.
Then, preceded by the seven-branch offering, recite the Prayer of Good Actions and the aspiration
prayer by the omniscient King of Dharma that begins “The path of the Great Vehicle beyond
limits...” as well as Jamgön Mahāpaṇḍita’s Prayer for the Flourishing of the Teachings
of the Ancient Translations and the verses of auspiciousness spoken by the Buddha and so
on, and thereby make everything virtuous and excellent.

This is a means of offering butter lamps in connection with the Unsurpassed Yoga; to practise
the sūtra tradition exclusively it is good to use the brief and elaborate lamp offering
methods compiled by the omniscient guru and drawn from the sūtras.

May the precious torch of the virtue that arises from thisBlaze away to banish all the darkness
of the three worlds,And bring wise realization of the nature and multiplicity of things,So
that we may gain the great treasury of Mañjuśrī’s insight.

In response to the insistent requests of Orgyen Tenpel, exponent of the inner science who resides
at the Tupten Shedrup Norbü Lhunpo tantric temple at Katok Dorje Den, Chökyi Lodrö,
who holds the name of an incarnation of Jamyang Khyentse, wrote this in accordance with the
intent of the great master of Oḍḍiyāna, without polluting it with his own fabrications,
on the auspicious tenth day of the seventh month. The scribe was Chamdo Kyomda Tulku Jamyang
Chökyi Nyinjé. Through this, may the teachings of the Victorious One in general and the
precious teachings of the three inner tantras of the Vajra Vehicle of the Ancient Translations
in particular shine like the light of the sun and may virtue and goodness abound.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'phags pa 'jam dpal la brten pa'i mar me'i mchod chog
ye shes sgron me/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse
Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 9: 457–463

Version: 1.2-20220112
↑ One of the five mothers or buddha-consorts, Paṇḍaravāsinī represents the natural purity of
the element fire.↑ This fulfilment appears in the Thorough Purification of Misdeeds and Obscurations
Rite from the Self-Liberated Wisdom Intent of the Peaceful and Wrathful Ones (zhi
khro dgongs pa rang grol gyi cho ga sdig sgrib rnam par sbyong ba).↑ i.e., oṃ eho śuddhe
śuddhe | yaṃ ho śuddhe śuddhe | baṃ ho śuddhe śuddhe | laṃ ho śuddhe śuddhe | raṃ ho śuddhe
śuddhe | a ā svāhā | all breakages, impairments and conceptual obscurations—śāntiṃ kuru
svāhā